---
layout: post
title: How To Use Lambda Expressions in C++11
date: 16-10-19 08:20:38 -0700
categories: C++11, lambda, functional, programming, closures
---


## A Basic Example

    void main()
    {
        // Define the lambda:
        auto functionName = [] () { cout << "Hello World."; };

        // Call the lambda:
        funcionName();

        // Here's a lambda with arguments:
        auto arg_lambda = [] (int x, int y) { cout << x << ", " << y; };

        // Calling it:
        arg_lambda(1, 2);
    }

- `auto functionName =` Assign the lambda to a variable we can reference.
- `[]` The lambda operator.
- `()` Same as every function argument list. Optional if empty.
- `{ ... }` The body of the lambda.

C++ is back to its old bad habits of overloading its operators with drastically different meanings that both you and the compiler must infer from the context. 

The operator `[]` we all know from our old friend, the array definition. This time it has been re-purposed to define the lambda.

They've done this to us before. Anybody who remembers their first time with pointers in C, and trying to decipher if `*my_variable` was going to define a pointer, or deference to some other type will now be suffering flashbacks.

The thing to look for here is that the `[]` operator for lambdas will not follow a variable name.

	my_array[] = { 1, 2, 3 }; // defines an array
	my_lambda = [] { return my_array; }; // defines a lambda

You can think of `[]` as the name of a function, since it follows pretty much the same format:

	auto myFunction() -> void { ... };
	[] () -> void { ... };


## Lambdas work like an expression

    template<typename MyFunctionType>
    void printStuff(MyFunctionType my_function)
    {
        // The lambda is passed in as an argument and actually called here.
        my_function();
    }

    void main()
    {
        // Define the lambda here
        auto functionName = [] { cout << "Hello World."; };
    
        // Pass it to the method here
        printStuff(functionName);
    
        // Or just define it on the spot like a slob:
        printStuff( [] { cout << "Hello on the fly."; } );
    }

## Variable Capture

Lambdas can cheat on scope and use variables defined outside.

    void main()
    {
        string name;
        cin >> name;
    
        auto func = [&] { cout << "Hello " << name; };
        func();
    }

- `[&]` Defines a lambda with variable capture ability. Specifically capture by reference. (The value can be modified outside the lambda!)
- `[=]` Will copy the variable to the lambda's scope for use.
- `[=, &x]` With this notation, you can copy all captured variables for local use, but define the variable named `x` to be captured by reference. Replace `x` with your specific variable name.
- `[x]` Captures `x` only as a copy.
- `[this]` Captures the `this` pointer of the class that calls it.

## Return Values

Lambdas can be given return values like functions:

    // compiler guess you are returning an int.
    [] () { return 1; };

Return types might need to be made more clear:

    // programmer is explicitly defining the return type:
    [] () -> int {return 1;};

- `-> int` Defines the return type as int.

This is a new C++ 11 way of defining return types. 


    // this
    int myFunction();

    // becomes this
    auto myFunction() -> int;

So they are doing it to us again with the overloaded arrow operator. I think that keeping a certain level of confusion in the language is meant as an attempt to sort the new programmers from the greybeards.

    MyDynamicObject -> myMethod();
    
    // is completely different than this use of ->
    
    [] () -> std::string { ... };

## Lambdas as Arguments and Return Types

Use `std::function` as the type when you want to collect a lambda in the argument list or return one from your "lambda factory" method.

This requires the `#include <functional>` header to use.

So you could skip the template and do this:

    template<typename MyFunctionType>
    void printStuff(MyFunctionType my_function)
    {
        // The lambda is passed in as an argument and actually called here.
        my_function();
    }

	// becomes this:

	void printStuff(std::function<void()> my_function)
	{
		my_function();
	}

Or if an argument is required for the lambda:

    void myFunction(std::function<void (string)> my_lambda)
    {
        string my_string = "Hello World.";
        my_lambda(my_string);
    }

    // call it
    myFunction([] (string x) { cout << "my string x=" << x; });

    // prints:
    // my string x=Hello World.

Or the lambda will have a return value:

    void myFunction(std::function<bool (string)> my_lambda)
    {
        string my_string = "Hello";
        bool is_printable = my_lambda(my_string);
    }
    
    // call it
    myFunction( [] (string x) -> bool {
        if (isPrintable(x)) return true;
        else return false;
    });

Or the lambda will have multiple arguments:

    void myFunction(std::function<string (string, int)> my_lambda)
    {
        string my_string = "Hello";
        int my_int = 1;
        cout << my_lambda(my_string, my_int);
    }

Or as a return value:

    std::function createFunctions()
    {
        return [] () -> int { return 42; };
    }

And you can see if std::function has been assigned a function by treating it like a bool:

    std::function<int ()> myFunciton;
    
    if (myFunction) {
        // will not execute
        myFunciton();
    }
    
    myFunction = [](){cout << "Hello World.";};
    
    if (myFunction) {
        // will print "Hello World."
        myFunction();
    }

## Why?

Why use lambdas?

- Easier to implement than creating a delegate to pass one or two functions as parameters.
- Look at JavaScript and JQuery and see all the uses for closures. It's the same thing. Lambdas make for great callback arguments.
- Use with iterators in a for_each method:
    
    vector<string> my_vector;
    
    for_each(my_vector.begin(), my_vector.end(), [] (string list_item) {
        cout << list_item << endl;
    });

- Pass an action to a function without wrapping it up in a class.


## My Opinion

I hate nesting. Lambdas that get defined as in-line functions are going to add another nested layer to your code.

In my code, I like to keep things clean. I don't want to go searching for that opening brace. Especially in loops. I tend to nest a try/catch block immediately within loops so any exceptions don't break them. That already adds too many nested blocks.

You will more often than not see my code called like this:

    myFunction (std::vector<std::string> string_list) {
        for_each(string_list.begin(), string_list.end(), [] (std::string list_item) {
            eachListItem(list_item);
        });
    }

The `eachListItem()` will contain the try/catch block and any logic. This reduces the nesting and improves readability. This is a pattern I follow in JavaScript all the time, where my closures just call some other function to do the work.

Inline functions are neat, and they have their uses. But I believe that a function should do **one thing**, and one thing only. When we start defining functions in-line like this it can get out of hand real fast.
